Chapter 49: Jaundice
Savio John; Daniel S. Pratt


INTRODUCTION
Jaundice is a yellowish discoloration of body tissues resulting from the deposition of bilirubin. Tissue deposition of bilirubin occurs only in the presence of serum hyperbilirubinemia and is a sign of either liver disease or, less often, a hemolytic disorder or disorder of bilirubin metabolism. The degree of serum bilirubin elevation can be estimated by physical examination. Slight increases in serum bilirubin level are best detected by examining the sclerae for icterus. Sclerae have a particular affinity for bilirubin due to their high elastin content, and the presence of scleral icterus indicates a serum bilirubin level of at least 51 μmol/L (3 mg/dL). The ability to detect scleral icterus is made more difficult if the examining room has fluorescent lighting. If the examiner suspects scleral icterus, a second site to examine is underneath the tongue. As serum bilirubin levels rise, the skin will eventually become yellow in light-skinned patients and even green if the process is long-standing; the green color is produced by oxidation of bilirubin to biliverdin.

The differential diagnosis for yellowing of the skin is limited. In addition to jaundice, it includes carotenoderma; the use of drugs including quinacrine, sunitinib, and sorafenib; and excessive exposure to phenols. Carotenoderma, a yellow coloring of the skin, is associated with diabetes, hypothyroidism, and anorexia nervosa, but most commonly, it is caused by the ingestion of an excessive amounts of vegetables and fruits such as carrots, leafy vegetables, squash, peaches, and oranges that contain carotene. In jaundice, the yellow coloration of the skin is uniformly distributed over the body, whereas in carotenoderma, the pigment is concentrated on the palms, soles, forehead, and nasolabial folds. Carotenoderma can be distinguished from jaundice by the sparing of the sclerae. Quinacrine causes a yellow discoloration of the skin in 4–37% of patients treated with it. It has also been reported with the use of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors sunitinib and sorafenib.

Another sensitive indicator of increased serum bilirubin is darkening of the urine, which is due to the renal excretion of conjugated bilirubin. Patients often describe their urine as tea- or cola-colored. Bilirubinuria indicates an elevation of the direct serum bilirubin fraction and, therefore, the presence of liver or biliary disease.

Serum bilirubin levels increase when an imbalance exists between bilirubin production and clearance. A logical evaluation of the patient who is jaundiced requires an understanding of bilirubin production and metabolism.

PRODUCTION AND METABOLISM OF BILIRUBIN
(See Chap. 338) Bilirubin, a tetrapyrrole pigment, is a breakdown product of heme (ferroprotoporphyrin IX). About 80–85% of the 4 mg/kg body weight of bilirubin produced each day is derived from the breakdown of hemoglobin in senescent red blood cells. The remainder comes from prematurely destroyed erythroid cells in bone marrow and from the turnover of hemoproteins such as myoglobin and cytochromes found in tissues throughout the body.

The formation of bilirubin occurs in reticuloendothelial cells, primarily in the spleen and liver. The first reaction, catalyzed by the microsomal enzyme heme oxygenase, oxidatively cleaves the α bridge of the porphyrin group and opens the heme ring. The end products of this reaction are biliverdin, carbon monoxide, and iron. The second reaction, catalyzed by the cytosolic enzyme biliverdin reductase, reduces the central methylene bridge of biliverdin and converts it to bilirubin. Bilirubin formed in the reticuloendothelial cells is virtually insoluble in water due to tight internal hydrogen bonding between the water-soluble moieties of bilirubin—that is, the bonding of the propionic acid carboxyl groups of one dipyrrolic half of the molecule with the imino and lactam groups of the opposite half. This configuration blocks solvent access to the polar residues of bilirubin and places the hydrophobic residues on the outside. To be transported in blood, bilirubin must be solubilized. Solubilization is accomplished by the reversible, noncovalent binding of bilirubin to albumin. Unconjugated bilirubin bound to albumin is transported to the liver. There, the bilirubin—but not the albumin—is taken up by hepatocytes via a process that at least partly involves carrier-mediated membrane transport. No specific bilirubin transporter has yet been identified (Chap. 338, Fig. 338-1).

After entering the hepatocyte, unconjugated bilirubin is bound in the cytosol to several proteins including proteins in the glutathione-S-transferase superfamily. These proteins serve both to reduce efflux of bilirubin back into the serum and to present the bilirubin for conjugation. In the endoplasmic reticulum, bilirubin is made aqueous soluble by conjugation to glucuronic acid, a process that disrupts the hydrophobic internal hydrogen bonds and yields bilirubin monoglucuronide and diglucuronide. The conjugation of glucuronic acid to bilirubin is catalyzed by bilirubin uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyl transferase (UDPGT). The now-hydrophilic bilirubin conjugates diffuse from the endoplasmic reticulum to the canalicular membrane, where bilirubin monoglucuronide and diglucuronide are actively transported into canalicular bile by an energy-dependent mechanism involving the multidrug resistance–associated protein 2 (MRP2). A portion of bilirubin glucuronides is transported into the sinusoids and portal circulation by MRP3 and is subjected to reuptake into the hepatocyte by the sinusoidal organic anion transport protein 1B1 (OATP1B1) and OATP1B3. The conjugated bilirubin excreted into bile drains into the duodenum and passes unchanged through the proximal small bowel. Conjugated bilirubin is not reabsorbed by the intestinal mucosa due to its hydrophilicity and increased molecular size. When the conjugated bilirubin reaches the distal ileum and colon, it is hydrolyzed to unconjugated bilirubin by bacterial β-glucuronidases. The unconjugated bilirubin is reduced by normal gut bacteria to form a group of colorless tetrapyrroles called urobilinogens and other products, the nature and relative amounts of which depend on the bacterial flora. About 80–90% of these products are excreted in feces, either unchanged or oxidized to orange derivatives called urobilins. The remaining 10–20% of the urobilinogens undergo enterohepatic cycling. A small fraction (usually <3 mg/dL) escapes hepatic uptake, filters across the renal glomerulus, and is excreted in urine. Increased urinary excretion of urobilinogen can be due to increased bilirubin production, increased hepatic reabsorption of urobilinogen from the colon, or decreased hepatic clearance of urobilinogen.

MEASUREMENT OF SERUM BILIRUBIN
The terms direct and indirect bilirubin—that is, conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin, respectively—are based on the original van den Bergh reaction. This assay, or a variation of it, is still used in most clinical chemistry laboratories to determine the serum bilirubin level. In this assay, bilirubin is exposed to diazotized sulfanilic acid and splits into two relatively stable dipyrrylmethene azopigments that absorb maximally at 540 nm, allowing photometric analysis. The direct fraction is that which reacts with diazotized sulfanilic acid in the absence of an accelerator substance such as alcohol. The direct fraction provides an approximation of the conjugated bilirubin level in serum. The total serum bilirubin is the amount that reacts after the addition of alcohol. The indirect fraction is the difference between the total and the direct bilirubin levels and provides an estimate of the unconjugated bilirubin in serum. Unconjugated bilirubin also reacts with diazo reagents, albeit slowly, even when the accelerator is absent. Thus, the calculated indirect bilirubin may underestimate the true amount of unconjugated bilirubin in circulation.

With the van den Bergh method, the normal serum bilirubin concentration usually is between 17 and 26 μmol/L (1 and 1.5 mg/dL). Total serum bilirubin concentrations are between 3.4 and 15.4 μmol/L (0.2 and 0.9 mg/dL) in 95% of a normal population. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is present when the direct fraction is <15% of the total serum bilirubin. The presence of even limited amounts of true conjugated bilirubin in serum suggests significant hepatobiliary pathology. As conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is always associated with bilirubinuria (except in the presence of delta bilirubin in prolonged cholestasis when jaundice is overt), detection of bilirubin in urine via dipstick test is extremely helpful to confirm the presence of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in a patient with mildly elevated direct fraction.

Several new techniques, although less convenient to perform, have added considerably to our understanding of bilirubin metabolism. First, studies using these methods demonstrate that, in normal persons or those with Gilbert’s syndrome, almost 100% of the serum bilirubin is unconjugated; <3% is monoconjugated bilirubin. Second, in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, the total serum bilirubin concentration measured by these new, more accurate methods is lower than the values found with diazo methods. This finding suggests that there are diazo-positive compounds distinct from bilirubin in the serum of patients with hepatobiliary disease. Third, these studies indicate that, in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, monoglucuronides of bilirubin predominate over diglucuronides. Fourth, part of the direct-reacting bilirubin fraction includes conjugated bilirubin that is covalently linked to albumin. This albumin-linked fraction of conjugated bilirubin (delta fraction, delta bilirubin, or biliprotein) represents an important fraction of total serum bilirubin in patients with cholestasis and hepatobiliary disorders. The delta bilirubin is formed in serum when hepatic excretion of bilirubin glucuronides is impaired and the glucuronides accumulate in serum. By virtue of its tight binding to albumin, the clearance rate of delta bilirubin from serum approximates the half-life of albumin (12–14 days) rather than the short half-life of bilirubin (about 4 h).

The prolonged half-life of albumin-bound conjugated bilirubin accounts for two previously unexplained enigmas in jaundiced patients with liver disease: (1) that some patients with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia do not exhibit bilirubinuria during the recovery phase of their disease because the delta bilirubin, although conjugated, is covalently bound to albumin and therefore not filtered by the renal glomeruli, and (2) that the elevated serum bilirubin level declines more slowly than expected in some patients who otherwise appear to be recovering satisfactorily. Late in the recovery phase of hepatobiliary disorders, all the conjugated bilirubin may be in the albumin-linked form.

MEASUREMENT OF URINE BILIRUBIN
Unconjugated bilirubin is always bound to albumin in the serum, is not filtered by the kidney, and is not found in the urine. Conjugated bilirubin is filtered at the glomerulus, and the majority is reabsorbed by the proximal tubules; a small fraction is excreted in the urine. Any bilirubin found in the urine is conjugated bilirubin. The presence of bilirubinuria on urine dipstick test (Ictotest) indicates an elevation of the conjugated bilirubin fraction that cannot be excreted from the liver and implies the presence of hepatobiliary disease. A false-negative result is possible in patients with prolonged cholestasis due to the predominance of delta bilirubin, which is covalently bound to albumin and therefore not filtered by the renal glomeruli.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH JAUNDICE
The goal of this chapter is not to provide an encyclopedic review of every condition that causes jaundice. Rather, the chapter is intended to offer a framework that helps a physician to evaluate the patient with jaundice in a logical way (Fig. 49-1).

FIGURE 49-1 Evaluation of the patient with jaundice. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AMA, antimitochondrial antibody; ANA, antinuclear antibody; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; LKM, liver-kidney microsomal antibody; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody; SPEP, serum protein electrophoresis.

View Full Size
The initial step is to perform appropriate blood tests in order to determine whether the patient has an isolated elevation of serum bilirubin. If so, is the bilirubin elevation due to an increased unconjugated or conjugated fraction? If the hyperbilirubinemia is accompanied by other liver test abnormalities, is the disorder hepatocellular or cholestatic? If cholestatic, is it intra- or extrahepatic? These questions can all be answered with a thoughtful history, physical examination, and interpretation of laboratory and radiologic tests and procedures.

The bilirubin present in serum represents a balance between input from the production of bilirubin and hepatic/biliary removal of the pigment. Hyperbilirubinemia may result from (1) overproduction of bilirubin; (2) impaired uptake, conjugation, or excretion of bilirubin; or (3) regurgitation of unconjugated or conjugated bilirubin from damaged hepatocytes or bile ducts. An increase in unconjugated bilirubin in serum results from overproduction, impaired uptake, or conjugation of bilirubin. An increase in conjugated bilirubin is due to decreased excretion into the bile ductules or backward leakage of the pigment. The initial steps in evaluating the patient with jaundice are to determine (1) whether the hyperbilirubinemia is predominantly conjugated or unconjugated in nature and (2) whether other biochemical liver tests are abnormal. The thoughtful interpretation of limited data permits a rational evaluation of the patient (Fig. 49-1). The following discussion will focus solely on the evaluation of the adult patient with jaundice.

Isolated Elevation of Serum Bilirubin
UNCONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
The differential diagnosis of isolated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is limited (Table 49-1). The critical determination is whether the patient is suffering from a hemolytic process resulting in an overproduction of bilirubin (hemolytic disorders and ineffective erythropoiesis) or from impaired hepatic uptake/conjugation of bilirubin (drug effect or genetic disorders).

TABLE 49-1Causes of Isolated Hyperbilirubinemia
View Table
Hemolytic disorders that cause excessive heme production may be either inherited or acquired. Inherited disorders include spherocytosis, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, and deficiency of red cell enzymes such as pyruvate kinase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. In these conditions, the serum bilirubin level rarely exceeds 86 μmol/L (5 mg/dL). Higher levels may occur when there is coexistent renal or hepatocellular dysfunction or in acute hemolysis, such as a sickle cell crisis. In evaluating jaundice in patients with chronic hemolysis, it is important to remember the high incidence of pigmented (calcium bilirubinate) gallstones found in these patients, which increases the likelihood of choledocholithiasis as an alternative explanation for hyperbilirubinemia.

Acquired hemolytic disorders include microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (e.g., hemolytic-uremic syndrome), paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, spur cell anemia, immune hemolysis, and parasitic infections (e.g., malaria and babesiosis). Ineffective erythropoiesis occurs in cobalamin, folate, and iron deficiencies. Resorption of hematomas and massive blood transfusions both can result in increased hemoglobin release and overproduction of bilirubin.

In the absence of hemolysis, the physician should consider a problem with the hepatic uptake or conjugation of bilirubin. Certain drugs, including rifampin and probenecid, may cause unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia by diminishing hepatic uptake of bilirubin. Impaired bilirubin conjugation occurs in three genetic conditions: Crigler-Najjar syndrome types I and II and Gilbert’s syndrome. Crigler-Najjar type I is an exceptionally rare condition found in neonates and characterized by severe jaundice (bilirubin >342 μmol/L [>20 mg/dL]) and neurologic impairment due to kernicterus, frequently leading to death in infancy or childhood. These patients have a complete absence of bilirubin UDPGT activity; are totally unable to conjugate bilirubin; and hence cannot excrete it.

Crigler-Najjar type II is somewhat more common than type I. Patients live into adulthood with serum bilirubin levels of 103–428 μmol/L (6–25 mg/dL). In these patients, mutations in the bilirubin UDPGT gene cause the reduction—typically ≤10%—of the enzyme’s activity. Bilirubin UDPGT activity can be induced by the administration of phenobarbital, which can reduce serum bilirubin levels in these patients. Despite marked jaundice, these patients usually survive into adulthood, although they may be susceptible to kernicterus under the stress of concurrent illness or surgery.

Gilbert’s syndrome is also marked by the impaired conjugation of bilirubin due to reduced bilirubin UDPGT activity (typically 10–35% of normal). Patients with Gilbert’s syndrome have mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, with serum levels almost always <103 μmol/L (6 mg/dL). The serum levels may fluctuate, and jaundice is often identified only during periods of stress, concurrent illness, alcohol use, or fasting. Unlike both Crigler-Najjar syndromes, Gilbert’s syndrome is very common. The reported incidence is 3–7% of the population, with males predominating over females by a ratio of 1.5–7:1.

CONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
Elevated conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is found in two rare inherited conditions: Dubin-Johnson syndrome and Rotor syndrome (Table 49-1). Patients with either condition present with asymptomatic jaundice. The defect in Dubin-Johnson syndrome is the presence of mutations in the gene for MRP2. These patients have altered excretion of bilirubin into the bile ducts. Rotor syndrome may represent a deficiency of the major hepatic drug reuptake transporters OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Differentiating between these syndromes is possible but is clinically unnecessary due to their benign nature.

Elevation of Serum Bilirubin with Other Liver Test Abnormalities
The remainder of this chapter will focus on the evaluation of patients with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the setting of other liver test abnormalities. This group of patients can be divided into those with a primary hepatocellular process and those with intra- or extrahepatic cholestasis. This distinction, which is based on the history and physical examination as well as the pattern of liver test abnormalities, guides the clinician’s evaluation (Fig. 49-1).

HISTORY
A complete medical history is perhaps the single most important part of the evaluation of the patient with unexplained jaundice. Important considerations include the use of or exposure to any chemical or medication, whether physician-prescribed, over-the-counter, complementary, or alternative medicines (e.g., herbal and vitamin preparations) or other drugs such as anabolic steroids. The patient should be carefully questioned about possible parenteral exposures, including transfusions, intravenous and intranasal drug use, tattooing, and sexual activity. Other important points include recent travel history; exposure to people with jaundice; exposure to possibly contaminated foods; occupational exposure to hepatotoxins; alcohol consumption; the duration of jaundice; and the presence of any accompanying signs and symptoms, such as arthralgias, myalgias, rash, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, fever, pruritus, and changes in the urine and stool. While none of the latter manif
